hi i'm elizabeth a medical student
living in london and in this video i
wanted to talk about the
experience and overcoming impostor
syndrome in medicine
this will probably be quite a rambly
video so i do apologize i will try to
make it as structured and valuable as
possible but
yeah just so you know this is the
question i get asked the most
i did go from experiencing quite bad
imposter syndrome when i first started
medicine
to basically having none at all in the
last two years and i think i've been
very very
fortunate in the people i've been
surrounded with the things i've
experienced
and all of that has helped change and
shape the way that i view things
so hopefully through recounting my
experiences and my thoughts
you might be able to overcome imposter
syndrome in yourself
and therefore be more able to enjoy life
so that is my goal here
i really really hope this helps first of
all i think it's very important to kind
of define what imposter syndrome is
exactly
i'm talking about those of us who enjoy
being around
patients enjoy everything that medicine
is about
but suffer because we think that we are
not good enough
and for me in the beginning it was very
much the thought
of oh my god i've come here by accident
um this was an error and they're going
to realize at some point that i'm not as
smart as everyone else
i'm not as organized as everyone else i
am not as capable as everyone else
i'm going to fail all my exams and then
i'm going to leave and this is going to
be the most humiliating thing
so when you have pleasure on one side
with enjoying the course and that
crippling fear and anxiety on the other
side
feeling as though there's everyone else
who is doing fine
and then there is you i think this is
the way that i saw imposter syndrome and
how i would define my early experiences
jumping straight into it i think that
one thing that helped me
is realizing that it would actually be
unreasonable
to not have doubts about medicine and to
not have doubts about your intelligence
and your performance
because realistically if you haven't
started medicine yet
you have no evidence and no proof that
you will be good at it you don't even
know if you're going to be good at
university
you don't know if it's right for you of
course because you haven't done it
and to have doubts around that i think
it's absolutely normal and it's healthy
and it's fine
i think it would be unreasonable that
without going into university or without
starting yet to think that
this is going to be perfect i'm going to
be the best doctor out there i think
that would be unreasonable i think
doubts and uncertainty within themselves
are not negative it just depends on how
you interpret uncertainty itself
and the feelings that surround it those
can be positive or
negative i think that embracing
uncertainty is something that will
become more and more necessary as you
get older
and therefore as we grow older we do
become better
at it one way that really helped me see
things differently
is to think that okay i feel anxious now
because i'm not sure and i don't have
enough evidence that i'm going to be
good at this
when will i have that so will it be when
i've done my first lecture will it be
when i've sat my first exam
will it be when i've seen my first
patient when i've gone to dissection
well is
when when will i know that i can
actually be a doctor none of these
points if you just go on and on you will
see that you will never reach a point
where you think okay this is sufficient
evidence to know that i will pass
or that i will be good because even if
you pass the first year you're just
going to start all over again in the
second year
and the third and the fourth and
actually you're never going to know
what it's like being a doctor until you
are a doctor which is five or six years
down the line
and even then you will only know what
it's like to be a junior doctor you
won't know
what it's like to be a reg or a
consultant i think
realizing that there will be uncertainty
along every single step of the way
and no matter how much information you
are given you will never know
for a hundred percent that you are right
for this or that this is right for you
but you just do the best with what is
there so i think that especially when
you're just starting
and you're really really worried about
oh my god i i don't know how this will
go
just realizing that you know what it's
fine and that's probably never going to
go away
and there's always going to be more
things that i don't know about my
suitability
than i do so it's really not worth
stressing about it
at all while one aspect of imposter
syndrome is around your own ability and
capabilities another huge part of it has
to do with how you compare to others
and i think personally this was one of
the most difficult ones for me
because it's a relatively competitive
and difficult
degree to get into so chances are
you're quite competitive and so is
everyone else for example
for me it felt as though everyone was
the child of a doctor
it felt as though i was surrounded by
people whose grandparents had nobel
prizes in medicine
and i don't come from a medical
background and the most exposure i had
to medicine apart from my placement was
going to get a vaccine because
fortunately until that point i've been
very healthy
so it felt as though i was starting on
the wrong foot and these people
all had an upper hand and they were
going to do so much better than me now
i think that competitiveness is fine
if it's positive it can push you forward
to want to do more things which i guess
is okay
but negative competitiveness is one of
the worst feelings
and i think that you should not create a
competition for yourself
in something that you cannot compete in
you cannot change
i cannot change my parents professions i
cannot change what my grandparents did
i cannot change my past and how much
exposure i had to medicine
these are all things that i have no
power over so
it's not a competition it doesn't matter
i should not pay attention to these
things at
all i think realizing the difference
between things that you can control and
things that you cannot control
is very very important for example i've
always worked full time alongside my
medical degree which means that i
couldn't go to the library as much or
attend the extra talks that my friends
went to and
although all of these would make me
panic in the beginning i just realized
that
it's just something that i cannot change
um i will do the best where i can
but i'm not going to worry about this
there's no point in me feeling as though
i am less than
because they can do all these other
things there's definitely advantages
to whatever you're doing and whatever
position you are in this advantage might
be that your great grandfather was a
doctor but your other advantage might be
that because you work so much
outside of medicine you have better
communication with your patients
or you pay more attention when you are
studying there are sides to every single
thing
i wouldn't take it for granted that
people are somehow better than you
or more experienced than you just
because of how things seem in the
beginning
and in general i think the way that i
see things in almost everything in life
is
what i can change and what i cannot
change if i cannot change something
there's literally no point in me paying
any attention to it at all
and especially if that thing that i
cannot change
causes only negative feelings for me i
think that's absolutely ridiculous
if there's something that i cannot
change that for some reason makes me
extremely happy
that's fine but if it's something that i
cannot change and keeps me up at night
because i think i'm going to fail
or because i think that i'm just so much
worse than everyone else
then i think that that's completely
pointless i think the last point i'll
mention for now
is embracing the worst case scenario
this case was that i would fail an exam
or that i would have to quit university
so realistically my biggest fear was i
would fail an exam
and well now that seems absolutely
ridiculous to me it's
not a problem to purely an exam it
doesn't mean a thing there's retakes
there's so many systems in place to make
sure that you succeed
a lot more than there are if you fail i
don't think there's anyone who really
who got accepted into medical school
really really wanted to do it
and just couldn't have to be kicked out
for academic reasons
so i think that there's no point in
stressing about this i know it sounds
very very easy on paper but this was one
of those cases that changed for me so
much through talking to another doctor
and he asked me how many exams had
failed in medical school
and i looked at him saying excuse me
of course none it was it was ridiculous
to me to think that i could fail an exam
and he laughed and said oh he failed at
least one exam a year
and this was a surgeon a qualified
surgeon a very good one also
um from what others say um so
that completely shifted my mindset and
thinking i'm being so ridiculous because
i
at that stage could only dream of
becoming a surgeon and to think that the
surgeon just very light-heartedly said
what medical school that's that's a joke
like if you fail it doesn't mean a thing
you're going you're probably going to
fail something and if you don't i mean
it's it's not a big plus really no one's
going to give you a badge for not
failing
and if you're having so much anxiety
around it it's i think completely
pointless
so i think wondering what is the worst
case scenario
realistically you do all this work and
you try so hard and
you sit the exam and you don't pass it
for some reason okay
then you just wait a few weeks or months
and set it later
and pass then and move on and in the
grand scheme of things
15 years later when you're a surgeon or
a gp or whatever you want to do
you're not even going to remember that
and it's really not going to matter
so i think that my advice would be to
look at these older doctors
and to realize how little they care
right now about their medical school
because they can really help put things
in perspective for you if you have the
opportunity to be around one who's very
generous with their time
just let them know about how you're
feeling be very open and say that i
think that everyone else
is so much better than me and i'm kind
of stressed that
perhaps i'm not good enough and i think
that they can really really help with
putting things in perspective for you by
nature human beings are not very good at
looking at the bigger picture
across large time scales but in this
case
if you can actually manage to do that
even once in a while
to realize that in the grand scheme of
things your silly little anatomy exam is
really not going to matter
and my stupid final is just another
like tick box exercise that i need to do
along the whole scale of my existence so
it doesn't really matter at all
and i think that perspective really
really changes things if
on the other hand your biggest fear is
realizing that this actually isn't for
you
then you're so lucky because the sooner
you realize that if you do get to
realize that in your first year second
year third year six years after you've
become a doctor
it's fine you can move on as soon as
possible it's not the single thing to do
in the world and it's probably not the
best thing to do in the world and
definitely not the best thing to do in
the world for everyone
so the sooner you realize that i think
take it as a gift
and do what you must with it continue or
move on or just depending on your
situation
so just to summarize the first point
would be that there's not enough
evidence that can be given
to get rid of that uncertainty and there
never will be so the sooner you get used
to that feeling of uncertainty
and see it in a positive way or
completely ignore it
the happier you will be the second point
would be to distinguish between
competitiveness that you can change
and competitiveness that you cannot the
things that you cannot you should
completely ignore
they don't matter they're just taking
away your energy the sooner you can get
used to this habit
the happier you will be my third point
is to
think of the worst case scenario which
are you exactly scared of
and how actually bad would that coming
true be
obvious i've put things in perspective
by reaching out to students in years
above you
or doctors even consultants the older
the better
they can really really help you realize
that you're freaking out for absolutely
no reason
and lastly if you're only getting
negative feelings around medicine and
you're feeling it's not right for you
that's absolutely fine i think that
there's no point in being scared that it
is not the right thing for you
the sooner you realize that the better i
am not particularly tied to medicine
i do it as long as i enjoy it at some
point i feel that it's not right for me
i'm happy to move on i find this kind of
attitude a lot more
calming and it removes a lot of that
pressure who made it so far honestly
thank you so much for spending this time
with me
i honestly hope from the bottom of my
heart that anything
that i said helped you at all please
feel free to reach out to me either in
the comments below or my instagram page
which is somewhere on my channel i'm
very very happy to talk
and hopefully give you some more advice
if you'd like some
i'll try to link some good videos on
imposter syndrome by people who are a
lot more experienced and a lot smarter
than me below if you would like to look
at those too
as always thank you so much i hope you
have a wonderful rest of your day
be kind to yourself and others and don't
believe everything you think thanks
bye